When reading a graphic memoir, do you ever think about the process of writing that the author went through? When first reading any graphic memoir I, assuredly like many other people, rarely ever think that the author did any more than idly write down their thoughts. However, especially with memoirs on the scale of Fun Home and Stitches, the process is huge and overwhelming to understand. Not only are there nearly infinite rewrites, redraws, and red tape, but there is also a significant amount of liability that the authors undertake by writing about other people in the context of pretty traumatic and defamatory circumstances. This liability is further compounded by the fallibility of memories as it becomes much easier to tell falsehoods about people when your first hand account can’t be relied on. Memories become so unreliable over the immense time periods between when these events happened and when the authors wrote about them, and become especially more unreliable as they are traumatic memories which are famously very malleable. So how do authors combat this achilles heel of writing a memoir? In Stitches, Small only implicitly combats this problem. However, on the other side of the spectrum is Bechdel with her graphic memoir Fun Home; Bechdel consistently explicitly solidifies her memories. But, does it even matter if the real memoir is 100% unwaveringly true? Or is the only thing that matters is emotional truth from the author? Through this essay I will examine the techniques that both Small and Bechdel used to limit their defamation and ethical dilemmas through preventing misremembering; I will show to all promising graphic memoirists that this is a nuanced issue with at least two valid approaches, but that it’s a very slippery slope in which one has to be very careful.
It’s important to thoroughly understand the two sides of this debate in depth and the two approaches that follow. 
There is the Small approach, in which you don’t provide any evidence and communicate through the art itself. This method of writing a memoir is the most obvious to the common reader as it is as close as you can get to idly writing your thoughts down that a graphic memoirist can get. Although Small doesn’t substantiate anything explicitly, he hints when moments should not be believed through the medium of comics. This is most blatant in the otherworldly interactions between David and the Fetus. It starts off with a close up of David, and then cuts between David and the Fetus repeatedly. At the start, the panel is contained, but as it moves on the panels start to “bleed”. (Small 39) In his book “Understanding Comics”, McCloud says that “bleeding panels” indicates that “time is no longer contained … [and] instead hemorrhages and escapes into timeless space.” (McCloud 103) This difference between solid panels with continuous time to timeless panels that bleed into the outside paper indicates to the reader that something is off here. Diving deeper into it, it indicates that this is likely up to David’s imagination rather than a fetus actually gaining consciousness and staring into David’s soul. Although it takes a lot more effort from the reader, this method is very effective in creating more depth and room for interpretation. Furthermore, it requires a lot less effort from the memoirist because they can just rely on their memories and don’t have to go out and gather evidence. On the other hand, to an unobservant reader these events could easily be misinterpreted as true which could lead to some defamation issues. Due to the extra mile readers have to put in, this may lead to the more fantastical stories like David’s to be shrugged off as fake by unobservant readers.
If there is an author catering to unobservant readers, it’s Bechdel. Her approach is to put an impressive amount of contemporary evidence to establish herself as a credible source. The most pertinent example of this is the rather shocking full body naked photo of one underage Roy. (Bechdel 100) Bechdel needed to include this picture in order to substantiate her claim that her father was a pedophile (Bechdel 17) as otherwise it may seem superfluous and unsubstantiated.  This method is very effective as it leads very little up to interpretation to the reader, you can’t really take away much else besides that this man is a pedophile. This method is better at preserving the truth and explicitly backing up your claims, not allowing room for the subjects of the memoir to be angry about defamation. It leaves less room for ethical dilemmas because everything is completely solidified in truth. The problem is that it assuredly requires a lot of effort to go back through places in your life and search for or collect evidence on top of writing a huge graphic memoir. Furthermore, now not only do you have to organize all of your memories, but you have to then fit them to the evidence you’ve found. 
	All of Bechdel’s effort makes it very simple and straightforward to interpret her story. But, by providing evidence is Bechdel putting the reader too at ease? There is an argument to be made that by explicitly establishing herself as a source of absolute truth, Bechdel misleads the reader. It’s misleading because Bechdel doesn’t actually substantiate all of the claims she makes; She is rapidly falling down the aforementioned slippery slope. She continuously provides photographic and textual evidence throughout the entire story and then suddenly makes a claim with no evidence but, by proxy is it assumed that that claim is supported. First she shows the naked picture of Roy (Bechdel 100), then several pictures of her father (Bechdel 120), and then includes one of her father’s letters to her mother (Bechdel 145), and periodically throughout includes continuous references to her journal. But then, she suddenly switches to speculation, saying that “A whiff of sexual aroma of the true offense could be detected in the sentence”(Bechdel 180) right above the judge’s speech bubble as if the judge is saying it themself. Obviously it’s beneficial to Bechdel’s story to have this tidbit in there, and it’s not any more damming that her father slept with more young boys than he already has, but after providing so much evidence for all her other claims it feels like a punch in the gut when this is just an open piece of speculation. Not providing evidence is ethical, you just are letting the reader trust your word of mouth; Providing evidence for everything is ethical, as the reader doesn’t have nearly any room for misinterpretation about the people in the story; but doing what Bechdel did by providing significant evidence and then not at all is very unethical and seems very shady. Obviously it’s most likely safe to assume that Bechdel is not maliciously doing this in order to mislead the reader, but she should have been aware how this could mislead her reader into thinking that some claims are completely true when they are just unsubstantiated rhetoric from Bechdel’s personal experience. Again no one’s opinions on Bechdel’s father are going to change if this piece of evidence were withheld, but maybe for the victim of the crime it would be more appropriate to only say statements that were 100% substantiated.
	Is all this debate even worth it? Why should we be worrying about speculation about a trial from a long time ago between a random person and a guy who is long dead? Some may say that the only thing that matters is the author’s emotional truth. Most don’t read graphic memoirs to learn the absolute truth, most read graphic memoirs to go through and understand it from the author’s perspective. But, even though it seems like we are making a mountain out of a molehill, I’m sure to that random guy from the trial it is a real mountain. It’s as simple as saying hurting less people is always better. Worrying over the minutia between the difference between implicitly and explicitly providing proof and choosing between where you put your evidence saves ten times more worrying from the subjects of these memoirs. As long as it doesn’t seriously compromise or take away from the memoir, there is no harm in being a little more considerate.
When writing a memoir, whatever way you choose to substantiate your memoir is completely ethical and up to you. You can just tell a story with no evidence, show what's true through the art, or explicitly show proof. However, you have to be very careful about where you place your evidence as it can be misleading and cause unnecessary harm to real people. Sometimes ethics can seem so inane, and sometimes it seems like the difference between a couple words or 1 panel couldn’t make that big of a difference. If you are just trying to write a story about yourself, why worry about hurting the feelings of these people who potentially could have caused you harm whether physically or emotionally? Unfortunately two wrongs never make a right. Nothing abdicates you of your ethical responsibility as a graphic memoirist. If two words or 1 panel saves even an iota of pain, then is it not worth it? It’s such an easy fix, why does it seem so pointless? Is it indicative of the society we live in? Please graphic memoir responsibly and ethically, set an example for our future generations of graphic memorists.
1590 Words





Work Cited
Bechdel, Alisson. “Fun Home”. 
Houghton Mifflin, 2006 pp. 17-180.
Small, David. “Stitches”. 
WW Norton & Co, 2009, p. 39.
McCloud, Scott. “Time Frames.” 
Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art, HarperCollins, 1993, pp. 94-117.
